---
layout: ‘@layouts/MarkdownPostLayout.astro’
title: ‘/Notes on Vue watchers’
pubDate: 2026-03-09T10:07:00-0500
description: ‘Rough notes on things learned about Vue watchers’
author: ‘Odin Ravensson’
image:
  url: ‘’
  alt: ‘’
tags: [‘development’, ‘website’, ‘note’, ‘vue’]
—--

[Vue watchers](https://vuejs.org/guide/essentials/watchers.html) are essential for handing
side effects on the state of data in Vue components.

```typescript
// Reactive objects, direct or computed references
watch(foo, (newFoo, oldFoo) => {});

// Getters
watch(() => foo.bar, (newBar, oldBar) => {});

// Will not correctly watch a property of a reactive object
watch(foo.bar, (nb, ob) => console.info(‘Will never fire’);
```

Watchers automatically track the entire tree of a reäctive object. However, when using 
a getter to a property, the watcher will only fire if the property changes, meaning updates to the property’s own properties will not fire by default.

```typescript
watch(() => foo.bar, () => console.info(‘Only fires when `bar` is replaced’));

watch(() => foo.doop, () => console.info(‘Now will fire if one of `doop`’s properties is updated’), { deep: true }
```

As of 3.5, `deep`’s value may be an integer indicating how many levels down the watched
property tree to track. Beware of performance issues when watching large or deep values.
Consider using `deep: false` or `deep: 1`.

Watchers will—by default—only update when the watched value updates. One can force an
immediate response by using `immediate: true` in the third parameter, the `WatchOptions`.

By using the option `once: true`, the callback will fire the first time the value updates
and no other.

***Nota Bene***: the `WatchOptions` also has optional properties
`onTrack(event: DebuggerEvent)` and `onTrigger(event: DebuggerEvent)` which are only used in
development mode. `onTrack` will fire when Vue begins watching the value, and `onTrigger`
will run each time the value is updated.[^1]

`watchEffect()` is similar to `watch()` except that the callback is the first parameter, and
the watched input is omitted. It will automatically track *any* of the reactive values in
the callback method—or at least until the first `await`[^2].

Watchers have three `flush` timings available in the `WatchOptions`; in run order they are 
`’sync’`, `’pre’` and `’post’`. `’pre’` is the default and in this timing, Vue will combine 
all the changes of the value in the tick and will execute a single callback *before* updates
are made to the DOM. Because it happens before the DOM updates, one will not have access to
the owner component’s DOM. `’post’` happens *after* the DOM updates, allowing access to the
owner’s DOM. `’sync’` runs *whenever the value updates*; this can cause significant 
performance issues. `watchEffect` has a convenience synchronous version: `watchSyncEffect`.

Because asynchronous execution may need to be cancelled, there are hooks for that, either 
through the imported `onWatchCleanup()` method or the cleanup function passed as the third
parameter in the callback function. Either of these take a closure and must be called in the
synchronous portion of the callback. Use them to signal requests to stop or to exist early
from synchronous functions. It works very well with an [`AbortController`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/AbortController).

Watchers are automatically cleaned up if they are created synchronously with the component, but if they are created out of sync, they will need to be cleaned up manually to avoid a memory leak. This is done by calling the `.stop()` method on the object returned by `watch()` and related methods. This object also has `.pause()` and `.resume()`. These might be useful for reducing computation needs.

[^1] `computed()` has the same options too.

[^2] I assume anyways. Judging by Vue’s other call-outs of asynchronous code losing the
context after the first `await`, I’d imagine this to be the case. It might merit a probe.